---
title: An Update On The NoSQL Handbook
topics: nosql books
layout: post
---
A couple of months ago I set out to write a [book on
NoSQL](http://nosqlhandbook.com). It's about time I give an update on how it's
been going, and when you can expect a book in your hands, or rather, on your
screen.

After an initial burst of writing, I took somewhat of a break, so please excuse
the delay in general. I spent the last weeks writing (a lot), and I'm currently
trying to polish and finish up the existing content so that I can throw
something out there for the world to peek at. Currently, the book covers
MongoDB, Riak and Redis in varying detail, and I'm working to finish up loose
ends to get into a good shape, before I'm starting work on more chapters.

A lot of people have asked me about pricing, distribution model, updates, and so
on, so I'm following up with an FAQ section. In general, I'm as keen to get
something out there as people have expressed their interest in reading it,
believe me.

Turns out though: writing a book is hard. It takes a lot of work, a lot of
discipline and creativity to come up with the right words and code examples. I'm
not complaining, it's just something you don't realize from writing even
slightly longer blog posts. It's still an incredible learning experience too,
because I (and you) get to play with pretty much all of the features the
databases covered have to offer.

So bear with me, I'm on it.

The book is not built around the idea that a big application is to be built with
each database. I'm not a fan of that approach myself, as it makes it too easy to
lose track of details. It's full of small examples, focused on specific
features.

**How many pages does it have?**

As the book is still growing, and I'm still playing with layouting details, I
can't give you an exact number, but the final book is probably going to have
more than 200 pages.

**What's the pricing going to be?**

I haven't decided yet. It's not going to be in the single digits pricing range,
and as the book is pretty dense with content, I don't want to undercharge. I'll
keep you posted.

**Will there be early access to the book?**

Yes, there will be. You'll be able to buy the beta of the book for a reduced
price, and follow the updates. Maybe even the commits on GitHub? I don't know.
Let [me know](mailto:meyer@paperplanes.de) if that's something you're interested
in.

**Do you have some samples I can peek at?**

Not yet. Layout is still far from final, but I'll throw something out as soon as
an early access will be available.

**What databases are being covered?**

To reach my goal for a final release, I'm covering Redis, MongoDB, CouchDB,
Riak, and Cassandra, all in varying detail. For some it makes more sense to go
deeper than for others.

**Are future updates included?**

Yes, as content gets added, typos get fixed, and new databases pop up, I'll send
updates to everyone buying the book. The updates are free. Consider buying the
book a subscription for more chapters on other databases.

**Are you extending the book with more databases over time?**

Yes, I have an insatiable thirst to play with more databases, and I don't want
to deprive you of experiencing that too.

**Are you covering database SomeDB? I hear it's the next big thing!**

For now, the list of databases is fixed. What's coming after that, on the other
hand, is not. I'm open to suggestions, but I'd prefer some non-exotic over a
very domain-specific database you wrote for a recent project. I'll set up some
sort of voting when the final release is done.

**What formats will be available?**

I'm currently working on PDF and ePub, with Kindle to follow. Gotta have my
priorities. A good-looking and readable PDF is my first priority, an ePub after
that. Buying the book includes access to all formats.

**Is there going to be a print edition?**

Print is not a priority right now.

**What are you using to write and generate the book?**

The book is written in Markdown (I hate LaTeX), converted to HTML using
[Redcarpet](https://github.com/tanoku/redcarpet), using
[Albino](https://github.com/github/albino) for syntax-highlighting, and
converted to PDF using the awesome [Prince XML](http://www.princexml.com/)
library, I hope to eventually use [DocRaptor](http://docraptor.com/) to create
the final result, as a Prince license is slightly out of budget, but DocRaptor
is pretty affordable.

**Where can I get updates on progress?**

Mostly be following [me](http://twitter.com/roidrage) or [the handbook
itself](http://twitter.com/nosqlhandbook) on Twitter.
