---
title: September Reading List
topics: reading books
layout: post
---
Been a while since the last reading list ([here's a handy
link](/2012/6/29/june-reading-list.html), in case you're looking for more to
read). Time to remedy that. Disclaimer: All links below are Amazon affiliate
links. You'll be feeding my reading habit. Thank you in advance!

**[Pricing With Confidence](http://amzn.to/QxutQq)** by Reed Holden

I know I already mentioned this on the previous list, but it's just so good. A
must read for pricing products or even your time as a freelancer. Must. Read.

**[Poke the Box](http://amzn.to/PfCJCC)** by Seth Godin

A nice and short manifesto about starting (and finishing) things. If you don't
finish, technically you never really started, right? Pretty delightful read and
a nice kick in the pants about starting something, anything, about making things
happen. Because if you don't, who else is there?

**[Fool's Gold](http://amzn.to/QD6IaL)** by Gillian Tett

An excellent rundown of how the 2008 financial crisis came about and how
derivatives and collateralized debt obligations came about. The interesting bit
is that they were created with good intentions originally, but as with a lot of
things, the short-sightedness and greed of investors and banks turned it into a
mind-boggling web that was bound to end up as a cataclysmic and cascading
failure across the entire financial system.

**[Start Small, Stay Small](http://amzn.to/QhEXCA)** by Rob Walling

If you're interested in running a small business, built around profitable
products, marketing and building them yourself, this is a great little
introduction on everything you need to know. I got quite a few ideas from this
book for my next ventures.

After you're done with it, and you want to keep going, [Amy Hoy's 30x500
class](http://unicornfree.com/30x500/) is highly recommended.

**[Architecture of Open Source Applications Vol. 2](http://amzn.to/PfF8xg)**

The second edition of this great compilation is upon us, and it's great. I loved
the chapter on [ZeroMQ](http://www.aosabook.org/en/zeromq.html) in particular,
but there's still a lot I need to read, e.g. the chapter on
[nginx](http://www.aosabook.org/en/nginx.html) or the one on
[PyPy](http://www.aosabook.org/en/pypy.html)

**[How To Win Friends and Influence People](http://amzn.to/Q06fNg)** by Dale Carnegie

This book is now 80 years old yet its content is pretty much timeless. The title
might be a bit misleading about what it's really about. If you're interested in
improving your people skills, how to make people want something you have to
offer and how you can turn them over to your side, this book is for you. If
you're running a business of any kind, this is a must read. The single most
revealing book I've read in a while.

It turns out, people and how we interact have barely changed at all. Still so
much to learn.

**[Predictably Irrational](http://amzn.to/OEgK94)** by Dan Ariely

A delightful and pretty revealing book about how irrational yet predictable
human behaviour is. Driven by scientific experiments, this book is also rather
revealing when it comes to marketing products, for example. I'd call this
another must-read if you run a business of sorts or sell something for a living.

**[It Will Be Exilirating](http://amzn.to/OEgZAS)** by Dan Provost

A very short but nice read about how Studio Neat, makers of the Glif and the
Cosmonaut, came about. Talks a bit about successfully running a Kickstarter
campaign, but also about running their small business in general. A few bits and
pieces to pick up in this one. Most importantly, it's another inspiration to
start something.

Happy reading!
