---
title: A Culture of Failure
layout: post
topics: operations humans failure
---
<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/nnova/2970063644/in/photostream/"><img src="http://farm4.staticflickr.com/3272/2970063644_d70d643711_d.jpg" width="550"/></a>

Recently, I've been thinking a lot about failure, my daughter, risk and
punishment, and the whole culture that has evolved around trying to avoid
failure, trying to point fingers or putting blame elsewhere.

Simplest example: my daughter spills something over the table. What's the first
reaction? Scolding or punishment of sorts. I'm guilty as charged. I read
something pretty simple and wonderful recently, a very short read titled ["Father
Forgets"](http://www.instapaper.com/text?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.csua.berkeley.edu%2F~chrislw%2Fdadforget.html).

That read got me thinking: why do we tend to punish failure immediately? It's
not just something to do with our kids, it's human nature. We tend to put blame
elsewhere, we tend to get defensive because people turn to us to fix a problem,
when something is broken in production, for example.

Why can't we instead make failure a part of our culture? Not just at home, with
our kids, but in our work place?

As soon as people feel like they need to get defensive, or they're blamed for a
problem that occurred due to a recent change of theirs, negativity hits everyone
on the team. It's hard to stay calm, it's hard to stay focused on what really
matters: that something is broken in production, affecting your customers.

As soon as people feel threatened or pressured, they get defensive or they feel
down because some of their own code broke something. Their vision is clouded.
Finding the problem's cause and implementing a solution is suddenly just a blur,
something that's hard to focus on. Even though that's what really that matters. 

When people feel like failure is not an option, they'll stop taking risks. When
people stop taking risks, your team and your company is doomed, innovation comes
to a grinding halt. Most of us are in the lucky position that lives don't depend
on our work. We can try new things, iterate quickly, disregard or improve them.

If my daughter doesn't take any risks because I keep punishing or scolding her,
she might just stop trying altogether. The analogy is an odd one, but there's a
striking similarity.

If a problem comes up, you fix it, you learn your lesson, you make sure it
doesn't happen again, you move on. It can be that simple. When everyone on the
team feels like failure is an accepted part of running an application, fixing
the problems as they occur as a team becomes a lot easier.

In the end, it's not a question of *if* something breaks, it's rather about
*when* it breaks. And the answer is: all the time. Great teams focus on the one
thing that matters in these situations: how to best resolve the situation and on
being ready when it does.

Embrace outages, the most common failure of our craft. Take a deep breath, phase
out distractions (including managers) and try to find joy in digging through
data and finding what's causing a problem. Turn it from a seemingly frustrating
experience into a personal challenge. You find the problem, you fix it, you make
customers happy again. Rinse, repeat.

Failure is cool.
